Just a brief statement on how you became a professional writer, the background
that led you to it Well it's, you know, everybody's story is a long story It's
much easier for other people to summarize you than it is for you to summarize
yourself I conceived in college the ambition to be a professional writer of
fiction It was a number of years before I stumbled into writing fantasy and that
was a crucial thing for me because my writing got a great deal better when I
started to write fantasy but that had been about 8 years I had been writing as
hard as I knew how for 8 years before I started on fantasy and from the time I
started writing fantasy until I finally achieved a publication of some kind was
another 5 years so I had a a 13-year apprenticeship in a sense and then it's
been only since then that I've been able to support myself as a writer. Did you
grow up reading science fiction? Well, actually no. And not for any other reason
than in terms of what I call a historical accident. I was living in India
because my parents were medical missionaries to India and we simply got a very
erratic supply of books. There was no one particular kind of thing that we got
except mystery novels. Missionaries love to read mystery novels. I don't know
quite why that is. But other than that, it was a random sampling of everything.
I read Leon Urus and the Hardy Boys at the same time, and I read Bamba the
Jungle Boy, and I read James Michener, and a whole range of things, whatever I
could get my hands on. Now, I loved every science fiction novel that I got my
hands on, of which I can remember every one. There were three. I read three by
the time I was a high school graduate. One was Alfred Bester's The Star Is My
Destination. One was A.J. Boudry's Rogue Moon. And one was Theodore Sturgeon's
More Than Human. Now, it's just an accident that I happened to get to read three
classics in the only three science fiction books I read. They made a great
impression on me, but that was all there was. Now, I came to the United States
at the end of my high school days to start college, and I wanted to read more
science fiction, but I didn't know any people who read it. So I didn't know any
place to get information about what was worth reading. And what I would do is
wander into a drugstore and pick up a science fiction book. And you can get some
remarkably bad books doing that. And the things that I picked up in the first
couple of years in drugstores were so terrible that I stopped reading science
fiction. And in fact, I didn't start reading science fiction again until I was
finally in a position where I knew people who could make recommendations to
separate out the real garbage from the good stuff.
Were the Chronicles of Thomas' Covenant, the first Chronicles, was that your
first published work? Yes. Well, actually, I had a couple of letters to the
editor published in the Avengers comic books back in the late 60s, but that was
the only other time my name was in print. I heard you talk about this, I think
it was yesterday. You did have a lot of trouble getting that accepted. I had a
great deal of trouble getting my break. Lord Foul's Bane was rejected by every
fiction publisher in the United States and also by all the magazines that did
serializations at that time and also by several agents. By the time I had
finished having that book rejected, it had been rejected 47 times. It took three
and a half years or so for me to do that. It was a very difficult process. And
in a lot of ways, I was saved. by happenstance. After being, I went through the
alphabet from A to Z with publishers, and when I got to Z, I didn't know what
else to do. I thought that it might work if I tried to send my book to British
publishers. I mean, I didn't have anywhere else to turn at that point. So I sent
away for a directory of British publishing so that I could begin going from A to
Z in England. And while I was waiting for that book to come, I just couldn't
bear to let my manuscript sit. So I resubmitted it to Ballantine Books. And the
only reason I did that was because they published Lord of the Rings, which meant
to me that they were a profitable company. If they were making some money,
there's at least a slightly better chance that they'd take a wing on somebody
like me. What I did not know was that since the last time I had submitted my
book to Ballantine they had fired their entire editorial staff and had all the
new people and essentially what they had was Lester and Judy-Lynn Del Rey and
the delrays jumped on Lord Foul's Bane as soon as they got it they knew almost
immediately that they wanted to publish this material changed my life but up
until then it was an extremely difficult process
this was unfair question I'm sure it's too general to be really fair one but was
there a particular impetus behind that novel? Well, that is pretty gentle. I
don't know what kind of impetus you're talking about. When you started to write,
was there something in your mind that said, I want to write a novel of this type
about Thomas Covenant, who's a leper and so forth? Well, the key thing for me
about The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant was that my inspiration for it came from
the end. The first idea that occurred for me for that book was for the climax of
The Power That Preserves. Now, when I got a story going, I had an entire story
ready to tell. And from that point of view, the impetus that got me going on
Lord Foul's Bane was the climax of The Power That Preserves. And that has been my
pattern in all the Covenant books is that I have worked them all backwards. I
mean, I don't write them backwards, but I plan them and arrange them backwards.
The thing that inspires me to write the story comes at the end. So with the
second Chronicles, it was the climax of White Gold Wielder that convinced me
that I wanted to write a second Chronicles. And essentially, my method is that I
have this climactic
scene in mind, and I have to answer the simple questions like, who are these
guys and how did they get into this mess? And I plan backwards on that basis.
Well, in order for that to happen, these things must have happened first. And if
those things must have happened first, then these kinds of people must have been
doing those kinds of things. And I arrange everything backwards until I get to a
point where I can start writing, which means that the one thing that's
absolutely clear to me the whole time when I'm working on these things, I know
where I'm going. I know exactly what the purpose of all these events is. It's
going to produce that result, which you as a reader will finally come to at the
end of 1,500 pages or whatever. And in the case of the first Chronicles, it was
that climactic scene where Thomas Covenant, who has been rejecting the
importance of his fantasy experience, comes face to face with Lord Foul. And
the fact that he disbelieves in some way in the reality of the fantasy gives him
the emotional power to not be crushed by Lord Foul. He knows he doesn't need
to be overwhelmed by evil because he denies its external reality. I mean, he
knows there's evil in him, but he doesn't have to be overwhelmed by this
externalization of evil. And that makes it possible for him to win. Well, I knew
that was where I was going the entire time I worked on the first trilogy. Okay.
I think in one of your glossaries at the end of one of the books, you had the
land, you had it defined as a focal region of the Earth. Yeah. You didn't have a
particular spot or a where that the land is supposed to be located then. Well, I
know it's on a globe. You know, I mean, this is a world, and the land is only,
obviously it's only a small continental portion of an entire world. When you get
into the second chronicles of Thomas' Covenant and people start voyaging around,
you at least get some sense that there are lots of other things going on in the
world too. My perception of it is that the land is kind of like the arena in
which the crucial issues for the whole world are fought out. And although they
have implications and ramifications which affect events in other parts of the
world and different things happen maybe because of what's happening in the land,
but that everything focuses there. Now this is, you know, it's a subtle question
in some ways, and it's crucial in others. In the One Tree, the characters, the
Elohim, who consider themselves to be very godlike, if not God itself, one
problem for them is that the crucial events are happening somewhere else. And
they think, I mean, obviously since we're crucial, if what's happening to you
were really important, it would have been happening here instead of way over
there. and that leads them into some decisions of questionable ethics. But for
the thrust of the Covenant books as a whole, it's certainly true that the land
is where the main battles are being fought and other stuff feeds into that but
is not central. Hey, Covenant, at least in my experience with fantasy, I imagine
for a lot of readers too, Covenant is sort of an anti-hero. You know, being a
leper for one reason, but also being a, doesn't want to be a hero in the first
place. Why pick somebody that was not in the traditional? Well, for one thing,
you know, I mean, I wasn't aware of the tradition. I had read Lord of the Rings,
but other than that I hadn't read much fantasy myself. So I wasn't making a
conscious decision to go for or against anything normal. I was just trying to
deal with something that seemed to me to be exciting and appropriate. Now, for
me, the story started with the climax of the power that preserves. I have an
unbeliever confronting the evil principle and rising above it. Well, I had that
idea in my head for like three years before I ever had, before I could figure
out who those guys were and how they got into that mess. That original idea,
although it was very powerful to me, was also static. There was no story
attached. I got a story when it occurred to me that the person who was going to
go from the real world to the fantasy world and reject the fantasy world in
favor of the real world should be somebody whose real world is unbearable and
whose fantasy world is terrific. I mean, look at it the other way around.
Suppose you have a terrific real life. And you have these rotten fantasies. if
you then say I don't care about the fantasy I'm going to stick with reality what
does that mean you know I mean you just that's normal self-interest anybody
anybody who has a terrible time in their nightmares and a wonderful time in the
rest of their life is going to prefer the rest of their life it only becomes a
moral statement when you have somebody who really hates their life because their
life is terrible and their dreams are just wonderful and they still say, I'm
going to reject the dream because I know the difference and even though reality
is terrible, I'm going to still affirm reality. Now that, you know, may seem a
little unbalanced or crazy to some people, but it is a moral statement of some
kind because there's no self-interest in it. It's not something that you do to
make yourself feel better. It's something that you do as an ideal or as a
belief, a religious belief. And, of course, whose real life could be lousier
than a leper's. Now, as soon as I thought of that, then I had a story. I had a
fantasy world, because all I had to do was invent a fantasy world that is the
direct opposite of being a leper. And I had, you know, everything fell into
place for me as soon as I thought of that kind of thing. Now, I never intended
that as an anti-hero kind of situation. From my point of view, the only thing
that makes Covenant an antihero is that he doesn't want to be a hero. He's
afraid of being a hero. But he is a hero. From my point of view. And I think
most of my readers eventually get sucked into the point, even though they don't
like him in the beginning. First they start to admit that he's got some reasons
for what he does and then they start grudgingly to respect what he's doing. And
before you know it, people end up liking him and identifying with him as if he
were a normal hero. and that's certainly the way it is for me I cared a lot
about this character from the very beginning and I never worked with him as
something that I would call anti-anything I knew he was having a tough time I
knew it was rotten to be in the position that he was in and I knew from various
kinds of studies and research what sorts of psychological problems people who
suffer from leprosy develop what does it feel like to be despised by everybody
around you for something that has nothing to do with what you did or didn't do.
You just got this disease, you don't know why, everybody hates you. That exerts
a tremendous psychological stress and it doesn't make people beautiful. You
don't become a nice guy just because you got leprosy. The pressure brings, any
kind of pressure, brings out the flaws in human nature. That's where you find
out that there are areas where you're weak and there are areas where you're not
very graceful is when somebody puts a lot of pressure on you and you start to
get a little nasty and you start to get a little impatient and you start to do
this and start to do that. It seemed obvious to me, particularly at the
beginning, that Covenant is under tremendous kinds of psychological and emotional
pressure and he's not going to be a very likable guy. But what's going to
happen, and of course I knew this all along, what's going to happen is that in
the course of coping with this dilemma, he was going to essentially reintegrate
his whole personality and become a constructive individual who does know what he
cares about and who does love other people and who is willing to fight for that.
So from my point of view, there was never any identification problem. I
identified with him a lot from the beginning. For a reader, it's different. A
reader doesn't know where I'm going. And so they have to kind of evaluate things
as it goes along. And for many readers, in the beginning, covenant is just very
obnoxious. then later they learn to kind of understand him a bit. I guess to me,
one of the paradoxes I guess it's a paradox that all six volumes is based upon
is the idea that Covenant's power, his ability to combat despite Lord Foul, is
simply the fact that he is a leper and does have such a I guess a lousy life in
the real world. That gives him a strength. Yeah, it gives him an emotional
strength.
what passes for magic in the Covenant books really is just an external
expression of personality. The strength for magic always comes from inside the
individual in this kind of world. And what creates emotional strength is what
makes magic. like Lord Morum, who it becomes in the first Chronicles becomes the
strongest of the lords, really, and does something that nobody else has been
able to do in the end when he when he kills the giant raver that's attacking
them. You know, what's really an issue for there is emotional strength. It's not
it's not that you that you know more than somebody else does you know more
spells than somebody else does or you've studied a different book of Arcana and
have learned different kinds of magic or anything else. In this kind of world,
magic doesn't hinge on that sort of thing. It hinges on the strengths and
weaknesses of your own personality. And that's where the danger comes from of
course because people who have that susceptibility to pressure to where like
Kevin, they crack when things get too bad. Then they fall into despair and you
get the same people who perform the ritual of desecration. The key issue is the
personality of the person who has the power. or their personality structure, how
strong or how weak they are. And what Covenant becomes over the course of these
six books is this incredibly strong personality. And eventually, he becomes such
a strong personality that in certain ways he doesn't need magic anymore. You'll
find this when you've read through to the end of White Gold Wilder, That he
dominates situations without using magic anymore because he has become such a
strong structure internally, emotionally. i imagine um one of the joys of being
a fantasy writer is in naming things i've always been impressed with your your
the way you pick names for things and i wondered if that was something that
comes naturally to you or you work at it or well i'm always a little embarrassed
because traditionally um i mean if you assume that the tradition is tolkien then
there's really a background for names certainly in Tolkien as he evolved an
entire language of Elvish and worked out immensely elaborate structures which
backup the names I have never been able to do that As a matter of fact I have
trouble with foreign languages of any kind and became that close to flunking
college German and stuff I do it by ear it's a very much intuitive kind of
process for me Now, there are situations in which I beg, borrow, or steal words
that mean something that I use for names. Like, for example, all the names of
the ravers are words that have meaning. And I use those words because they mean
something, but also because those words have the right sound to my ear for what
I want. So in those situations, the name has to meet two criteria. The meaning
has to be appropriate, and it still has to sound right. Other than that, I do it
by sound. Certain kinds of combinations of sounds and whatnot sound good and
strong and positive to me. And they sound like good guys. And other combinations
of sounds sound like bad guys.
You know, I make it up. I try to make it up consistently, obviously. Now, for
example, all the giants have names which are combinations of normal words. Salt,
heart, foam, follower. You know, those are all English words and you just string
them together. So obviously when I'm making up names for my characters, I'm not
going to make up that kind of name for one giant and then make up a completely
different nonsense syllable kind of name for another giant. All the giants have
the same kind of names. As it happens, the ramen, the people in the first
trilogy who work with the horses, they all have names based on Indian words that
I knew when I was a kid growing up in Indian. I just needed some sort of
principle to help me pull it together so that I'm sure I'd be consistent about
that name. So all those people have names that are based on Indian words. the
bloodguard and the hiru-chai all have names of certain, sometimes they have two
syllables more often than not they're one syllable words, you know, brin, kale,
kier you know, and they're all words that seem to me to they're full of
consonants, they're fairly strong sounding, but they're not words that that
would carry any direct meaning in English you know, so I follow patterns, but I
am doing it doing it by ear. I would imagine too that the name covenant has
meaning, doesn't it? Oh, well, of course. You know, I have my religious
background and everything else. You can't use a word like that around me without
it carrying all kinds of connotations. One of which in, you know, the religious
tradition is simply the whole question of the difference in God's relationship
to man between the old covenant and the new covenant. The term covenant is used
to refer to a relationship or a deal between God and man. One of the things
you'll notice in the first trilogy is that Covenants always trying to make deals
with the land. I'll do this if you'll do that, or if you don't ask me to do
this, I won't ask you to do that sort of thing. Every deal that he makes seduces
him a step further, but they always fail because he's using them as substitutes
for real commitment. In a biblical tradition, the first covenant, the old
covenant, was the covenant of law in which God gives you a bunch of rules to
live by and if you live by those rules, you're going to go to heaven and
everybody will be happy. As opposed to the new covenant, the Christ covenant,
which is the covenant of grace where essentially it says, you know, okay, we
found out you can't live by the rules after all, but I still want to give you
some way to get to heaven, you know, so we'll have this sacrificial kind of act,
and, you know, I'll send my son to die for your sins, and you can be forgiven
for not living according to the rules. And that brings up the question of law in
relation to man, and what law can mean. And, of course, particularly in the
first trilogy, law is a very important concept for the lords. They mean
something different than a set of rules. But in a way, it is a set of rules. For
them, law is the way nature works, and you have to live your life in service to
the way nature works and in harmony with the way nature works. And if you become
a corruptive or destructive influence, then you're going against law. So, I
mean, the thematic implications run in all kinds of directions. The same thing
is true, of course, for the name Thomas. Thomas was the disciple of Christ who
doubted Christ's resurrection, who doubted the fundamental religious idea on
which 2,000 years Christian history was going to be built." Well, Covenant,
Thomas Covenant, my character, is a doubter of a certain kind of sin. He takes
the really key point and rejects it for a while. And that allows me to imply
various sorts of religious implications, which I like working with. Throughout
all the books, you have references, of course, to this long background, people
like Berek Halfhand and Kevin Landwaster and the ritual of desecration, things
that occurred well in the past. Is this a scheme that you've worked out, say,
like in the manner of Tolkien, a whole scheme and you're just telling one little
portion of it? Not in the manner of Tolkien. Tolkien really did work out a grand
scheme, and a lot of it he worked out before he ever decided to write Lord of
the Rings or The Hobbit. this was his hobby, in a sense, was evolving this
history of the elves in the world, of which Middle-earth is only a small part.
And eventually he got attracted to the idea of taking a small portion of this
entire world history and trying to write it down for other people to read to see
if they would enjoy it. Not so for me. I started with the climax of the power,
of the Preserves. And I evolved everything else to try to aim toward that end.
So for me, people like Kevin and Berek and everything else were things that I
made up to set up the issues that I wanted to focus in on in The Power of the
Preserves. This is one reason that I can't write spinoff stories or secondary
tales. You'll never hear a short story from me about what some giant did over
somewhere else or the adventures of so-and-so hidden over here, my brain doesn't
work that way. I only made this stuff up because it goes to that focal point
that I'm aiming at, the climax of the power that preserves, and the stuff that I
made up fits that. It serves the purpose for which I intended it, but in my
mind, it doesn't have a life of its own, the way Tolkien's whole history
background had a life of its own. And so I just, I mean, they'll never be the
Donaldson equivalent of a Silmarillian because I haven't created any of that
kind of material, and I'm not likely to. I imagine a lot of your readers' idea
have probably responded to the Giants very positively. Excuse me. That's okay.
We'll edit those out. Good.
I guess I don't want to phrase this. Where did you get the giants from? I mean,
in mythology and a legend, usually bad guys. Well, I knew that, so when I was
originally planning the story, I wanted to reverse that and to have giants who
are good guys. But that was as far as it went. In any creative project of this
size, there are some things that you can track down and explain very clearly and
that there's other things that seem to happen by serendipity. There's an element
of discovery in any creative act. You discover your own material, and that's
balanced off by lots of other kinds of things that you do. I knew that I needed
characters in the story. I was going to call them giants. They were going to do
this and that. I knew what their function was going to be in the story. I knew
what was going to happen. I knew names for them. But the fact is that when I
started writing Lord Foul's Bane, I didn't have any idea what their personality
was like. I just hadn't figured that out. So my method in writing is very
subjective. Essentially, I start looking at everything through the eyes of my
characters, and I just try to see what they see and feel what they're feeling.
It's a self-hypnosis kind of writing where we try to eliminate Steve Donaldson
from existence, and the page ties right into whatever the ideas are and I just
try to write. Of course that means I have to do a lot of rewriting later. But at
the time, it's very subjective, it's very experiential. And me, Covenant, and
Elena were standing on the banks of the Salzees when I first met a giant. You
know, this boat was coming sailing up the river and I'm just sitting there at
the typewriter watching the boat come up the river. And I saw, you know, I mean,
I knew it was gonna be a giant on board. As the author, I had that one advantage
over at Covenant L.A. and I knew I was going to be a giant on board. But I was
just typing along and I think, oh, so this is what he looks like. And I'm
starting to, you know, just typing away. I'm just seeing him come up the river.
It's like he's coming up the river that's being projected on a screen on the
edge of the type desk or something. It was a real discovery for me. I found out
what he's, before he started to talk and I think, oh, you know, this is kind of
a nice guy, you know. And I started getting, oh, into storytelling and all this.
Oh, boy, I love these giants. This is great stuff. I didn't premeditate any of
that. It was a real discovery for me and a very happy discovery. I had a
wonderful time meeting giants for the first time. And that, of course, shaped
the whole context of finding out about their personality, really cast a lot of
light over all the things that they were then going to do in the story. And
there were some things that I had worked out that I was going to have happen in
the story, which at the time seemed purely mechanical. For example, this
question of the destruction of the unhomed in Sea Reach that takes place in the
Illearth War, where a raver goes and essentially knocks off all the living
giants.
excuse me now I planned that for purely practical reasons I knew that if I were
Lord Foul and I really wanted to march out there with my armies and defeat the
Lords the one thing I could never do would be to leave a party of giants sitting
behind me to attack me from the rear just when I thought I had the giants where
I wanted them I mean the Lords where I wanted them it's just craziness the
giants are over here the Lords are over there and if I go fight the Lords these
giants are just going to come plowing into me and I'm never going to be safe.
The only good way to attack the Lords is to take care of the Giants first, and I
just knew that Fowl was going to do that. That's a perfectly logical thing. He
is going to do something about those Giants and he's going to make it so that
they can't fight. But that's a very mechanical kind of storytelling decision,
and it's years away. Actually, from my point of view, I'm still writing Lord
Foul's Bane. That's coming up in the future. When I meet Saul Heart, phone
follower, and start to find out what giants are really like, this suddenly then
becomes a very important and also painful part of the story because suddenly,
you know, I fall in love with this entire race of people and I realize, ah, down
the line, I'm going to have them all killed off. It becomes, it becomes
emotionally central to the whole, to the whole story. It becomes one of the
really difficult things that all of the characters have to deal with. and that,
you know, that discovery of Foam Follower coming up the river just sheds light
and implications down the whole path of the story and to things that I could
never have foreseen.
Okay, I know the answer to this, but let me ask anyhow. You had always intended
from the moment you started, you had this image of the end of The Power that
Preserves the Ending that you started writing. You had the idea of writing six
books, two trilogies. No, well, I started with the ending of The Power that
Preserves. That's three books. What happened was that as I was finishing working
on The Power that Preserves, I became... Dissatisfied isn't the right word. I
think the first trilogy is perfectly authentic and satisfactory on its own
terms. But I became aware that evil is a much more complicated question than
that. Essentially, what happens in The First Chronicles of Thomas' Covenant is
the Hitler situation. Hitler comes along, he raises a big army, he wants to
conquer the world. The only thing you can do is to raise a big army yourself and
try and stop him. And it turns out whoever can put out the best muscle in the
field is going to be the one who wins. Now, as it happens in the case of Hitler,
the good guys won. And as it happens in the case of the Chronicles of Thomas'
Covenant, the good guys win. But just because you have more muscle doesn't make
you the good guy or the bad guy. It's just muscle. and on a certain level that's
a fairly simple-minded kind of kind of thing evil comes in many different guises
um and not all of them are that clear or that obvious and in a lot of the cases
muscle doesn't have anything to do with it muscle isn't going to do us any good
when we got richard nixon for president because the kind of unscrupulous thing
that richard nixon is doing is something to which muscle is an inappropriate
response you know they just don't connect and when Lord Foul does things other
than field armies muscle is not the answer well I got to thinking about things
like that while I was finishing work on the power that preserves and got another
hot flash for what then became the ending of White Gold Wielder for what would
happen well if evil doesn't do that what would it do and how would it work and I
got this really exciting kind of vision of of the climax of the power that
preserves and then i was back where i was before where i had to plan backward to
uh to figure out what the whole situation had been and how it had come about
okay um i
also know the answer to this because i've heard your speeches but i still it's
possible for you to give a brief answer um one of the people that asked you a
question i forget which section it was that uh at the end of the first trilogy
you give us hope the good guys win. And here we have the second one, and all of
a sudden that's not fair. Evil's still there, we didn't win after all. At the
end of the first trilogy you'd give us hope, but then you'd start all over again
and take it away from us. Why? Well, for one thing, if evil has been defeated,
what are you going to do for a second trilogy? I mean, from a perfectly
practical point of view, some of these things are necessary. But there are lots
of different answers, and one of them is just a matter of perspective. This
whole time differential thing that occurs between covenant's world and the land,
much, much, much, much more time is passing in the land than is passing in
covenant's life. And for the land, it's been three and a half thousand years.
Now, how big a victory does it have to be? The fact is that nothing in life is
absolutely permanent. And Covenant's previous victory provided 2,000 years of
peace and happiness. You know, we can't get 15 years out of World War II. You
know, we go through all of that. And by, you know, oh, six years later, we're in
Korea. And, you know, what, 12 years after that, we're in Vietnam. You know, for
us, when we win in the real world, when we win a victory, You know, it lasts for
minutes. Covenant's victory lasted a long time. It is just not reasonable that
that would last forever. In addition to that, I tried to make it clear in the
first trilogy that Covenant was not killing Lord Foul. You can't kill despite,
because in the final analysis, despite is part of what it means to be human. And
you can't exterminate your own personality.
What he does is masters it, in a sense, in the first trilogy. defuses it for a
while and you don't like taking the venom out of snake fangs or something like
that it be you know life becomes safe for a while but it's just as sure as death
and taxes you know this stuff is going to going to grow back and it seems
perfectly reasonable of course from a reader's point of view you know covenant
it's 10 years for a reader's point of view it may very well have been five
minutes since they finished reading the power that preserves they pick up the
wounded land and they find everything's going to hell in a handbasket
Essentially, what I've done is I've nuked the land, you know, so I can
understand that for a reader, this can be a real shock. You have this victory at
the end of the power that preserves. And it's not, in some ways, it's not a very
dramatic victory. Now, what I mean is that there's not a lot of emotional
fanfare attached to the victory. You know, they don't have ticker tape parades.
You know, they don't spend the way they do in Lord of the Rings. They don't
spend 50 pages explaining what happened to everybody after the victory. They
don't, you know. Covenant doesn't go back to Lord Mhoram and they don't fall on
each other's arms and shake hands and give in a feast and drink a bunch of
toasts and all this other kind of stuff. There's not a lot of validation.
Covenant wins. The land is safe. That's the end of the story. You know, Covenant
wakes up in the hospital bed and smiles and decides it's okay to go on living.
And then you go from there bingo, bango. And, you know, from fictional terms,
it's 10 years. from the reader's point of view, it's five minutes and
everything's been destroyed. You know, that's tough. And I appreciate the
position that puts a reader in. But you have to realize that from my position,
it's a very natural storytelling development. And without it, there wouldn't be
a story for me to tell. Okay, listen, how are we doing on time? I could talk for
hours on this and I don't want to take too much of your time, are we? Well,
that's pretty much up to you all. I can go on for another 10 or 15 minutes
anyway. I need it if you could. Okay. Yeah, okay. Thank you.
The choice of white gold. I think it was in the one tree. Maybe it was set
elsewhere. One of the characters says that white gold exists only in Covenant's
Ring. That it's an unnatural alliance of metals. Why did you choose that? Well,
precisely because it is an alliance of metals. You're never going to find white
gold ore. I don't care what world it is. It's an alloy. white, people make white
gold. It doesn't occur. And that makes it possible for me to hypothesize a world
in which that particular technology does not exist.
There's no gold at all in the first trilogy, but you do find in the second, if
you travel around the world, that there are other cultures with different
attitudes who have discovered gold. Yellow gold. The Kemper in Brothero uses
gold as a magical thing. So the metals do physically exist on the planet, but it
is a particular kind of alloy, and that makes it—I can then plausibly claim that
this alloy does not exist in that world. Now, that's from a pragmatic point of
view. From a thematic point of view, it's really important that we're talking
about something here that is a combination of materials. The wedding ring that
Covenant carries is, like himself, a paradox of a certain sense, or symbolically
a paradox. It is made out of disparate materials. It is one kind of metal and
another kind of metal fused together, and that is what Covenant does essentially
in the course of the story, is that he learns to fuse the disparate sides of his
dilemma, what they call the impossibility of believing the land true and the
impossibility of believing it false, and he finds a way to make those into one
thing. And it is out of those kinds of paradoxes that his strength comes, and
so, of course, a ring that is an alloy is symbolically apt for those sorts of
issues. That's what I want to guess. Okay, I think I read this correctly, but I
would like to ask you about it. Of course, the staff of law is one of the more
important devices, motifs. But you have it destroyed in the first trilogy. Okay,
at the end of the second trilogy, it's reforged in a sense. You have the
appointed, is that the Elohim? he appointed in vain. Okay, did I read this
correctly in that the appoint or the elohim, they're sort of the matter of the
earth, the essence of it. Vain is the structure. Well, energy and structure.
That's the simple way to put it. Um, any any principle of power, I think, has to
have energy and structure. William Blake used to talk about this. Reason is the
circumference of energy. And if you don't have both reason and energy, you don't
have anything at all. Because if reason doesn't restrict energy, then it just
floats away and you don't have any energy. And if energy doesn't press against
reason, then, you know, it's like a balloon. There's nothing happening. Reason
is lying there dead. And I think it seems natural to me that it would be that
way in any situation. You need structure or rules, balance, order, and you need
energy which is contained within that in order for there to be any
effectiveness. And this, of course, is perfectly consistent with the whole
concept of law that's posited throughout the first and second trilogies. In this
particular case, there is one other element that goes into remaking a staff of
law, and that is the element of intention, which Lyndon Avery provides. but she
provides the sense of purpose for the melding, but without the perfect
structure which the er vials created when they made Vain, and without this
totally unstructured kind of energy which the Elohim represent, you know, it
wouldn't be possible to remake the staff of law. And after all, it's not just an
ordinary tool of magic we're talking about here. but it's explained over and
over again throughout the series that the staff of law, by its very nature,
supports and defends the natural order. And it's very hard to use the power that
the staff represents to do anything which violates the natural order or natural
law. And when the staff is broken, that inherently weakens the entire natural
order. It's more than just a magical tool here. It's an expression of a certain
aspect of the existence of this world. And to make something like that again
requires an extraordinary combination of potentialities and purposes. Is that
second step going to be stronger than the first? Well, I think it's going to be
different in some ways. I wouldn't want to say stronger or something. But in the
back of my mind, for example, I think of it as a living staff rather than as a
piece of wood which is being used. Because, I mean, after all, Vane and Findale
both went in to make that. And it would not – I mean, I don't know everything
that's going to happen in the future. I haven't tried to figure it out. But it
would not surprise me to find that this staff had a mind of its own. if it comes
back in future stories and that there are various ways in which dealing with it
is very different than with the old staff flaw. Okay, I know when you go to
conventions and you talk to fans and they ask about your books and so forth, I'm
sure they ask you about your style and the use of your vocabulary, your large
vocabulary and so forth. I heard you say this yesterday, but I have sensed this
myself, I hope even before I heard you say it. You must have fun with your
choice of words. Yeah, fun not in any – I'm sure there are people who think that
I have fun in the sense of, boy, I'm going to fool people with this word. Ha,
ha, ha, those stupid readers, they'll never know what I'm talking about now.
That's not it at all. I really am not trying to confuse the issue by the
vocabulary that I use. It is intended to communicate, and generally I find that
readers who do the work to figure out what these words mean find that it does
communicate, that it says what I mean, and there are plenty of circumstances
where I can justify that even though the word is unfamiliar or maybe even
unknown to people, it's actually more precise than the other choices that I
have. but the thing that gets me involved in that in the first place is that is
that just words themselves seem to me to be a happy thing, I love words, I get a
great sense of pleasure out of discovering a word that I didn't know before and
finding out what it means and finding out how it can be used, you know, that
cheers me up and there are lots of ways in which I think that if my readers
could just hear those words in the spirit in which I put them in the prose, they
would find, for example, that the covenant books aren't as grim in mood as they
think they are. Because I'm shooting out these little gleams of pleasure all the
time. and I wish those could be received in the way they were meant because then
people would, well, like real Musgrave, you were at the panel yesterday, real is
an interesting man and there are times when he just laughs and chuckles and
grins reading things in my books which are grim and he knows that they're grim,
it's not like he's stupid or insensitive but he's also picking up some of the
other things that I'm trying to project as well There is an element of joy in
those books which balances a lot of the dismay. And from my point of view,
unfortunately, it's conveyed in, it's like being conveyed in code. It's conveyed
through my love of language, and not everybody on the other end receives that
message that I'm trying to put out.